welcome to topcasts where I'm speaking
to you in the shadow of what was one of
the greatest interviews if not the
greatest interview so far of David
Deutsche by Naval River camp on the Tim
Ferriss show now this is unusual for the
Tim Ferriss show normally Tim would be
doing the interviewing he did play a
supporting role as he said I found it
one of the most insightful overviews of
David's work and in fact we had a lot of
gems in there that David hadn't spoken
about much anywhere else from what I can
recollect anyway well worth going to the
Tim Ferriss show if you're not aware
that David appeared on there and getting
hold of that episode because we're worth
listening to more than once you can
easily find Tim ferriss's webpage of
course using Google and there not only
is there a link to the Show for download
on your podcast platforms but there is a
comprehensive set of show notes so if
you're a fan of the work of David
Deutsche this is a wonderful One-Stop
place to get links to a whole bunch of
related things and yes top cast appears
among them what I loved about this
interview that Naval and Tim did with
Dave it was well at certain points
Nevada was unpacking David's World View
and I'm going to get to some of that
today but also explaining how David had
made these fundamental contributions to
each and every strand of the fabric of
reality so not only does the beginning
of infinity and the fabric of reality
explain our deepest theories namely
epistemology and computation and quantum
theory and the theory of evolution but
Navarre was able to explain how David
Deutsch himself had made seminal
contributions to each of these areas and
that's rarely been done in an interview
before so I urge you to listen out for
that in particular another highlight for
me was David's wry sense of humor which
is easily able to escape people if
they're not paying attention and around
about 53 minutes in he's talking about
the distinction that he makes between
artificial general intelligence and
artificial intelligence and he said well
he said quote an aoi an artificial
narrow artificial intelligence an AI can
only do the narrow thing that it's
supposed to do like a better chat bot is
one that replies in good English replies
to the question you ask can look things
up for you doesn't say anything
Politically Incorrect
and I thought that was a wonderful dig
at the way in which some of this current
crop of chat Bots has been let's say
massaged in such a way to ensure that it
doesn't say anything too offensive to
contemporary ears I suppose what is so
attractive for me when even I who've
been explaining this for years now
listen to someone else talk about the
world view is just the logic to the
whole thing there's just such a a logic
to the world view once you see it so to
speak and this can sometimes be
difficult for people especially if they
only understand one aspect of it or two
aspects of it you kind of need to see
the whole to understand how it coheres
together and once you do you're on the
roller coaster by which I mean you're on
the tracks and you're heading down that
Hill irrevocably There's No Going Back
you are on the ride and there's no
looking behind you to try and go back
from where you came because some other
force is pulling you forward in the case
of the roller coaster it's gravity in
the case of David deutsche's worldview
it's reason it's reason you simply see
the world via this perspective that
makes sense and it's a perspective that
you notice allows you to see the world
differently and when you're first going
through the transition you can sometimes
compare both perspectives the
perspective you held and are escaping
from and the New Perspective that you
now adhere to then as time goes on like
with me I sometimes find myself in a
position where I find it difficult to
appreciate what it is I used to think
about these particular things what I
used to think about believing in the
science for example and now recognizing
that although science is the only way
that we can generate reliable knowledge
about reality valid knowledge about
reality actual knowledge about reality
good explanations about reality that
nonetheless it can all be completely
false or if not false in all respects
false in the final analysis
that can be jarring to people and it can
sound like a form of relativism but it's
not it's just humble fallibalism based
upon this notion that what we are are
people doing computations of a Kind an
explanation is a kind of computation no
computer is perfect they're error prone
and so too will be our explanations and
therefore there's a lot of therefore
going on when you take on this world
view you're looking at stuff differently
you're observing everything in a
slightly different way not just with
your eyes then you're not just observing
physical things of course you're looking
at science itself differently you're
looking at mathematics differently all
of knowledge differently you're looking
at people differently you're looking at
them as genuine equals in a scientific
sense not merely some sort of spiritual
sense although it has that sense to some
people sometimes you look at the old way
the other way ways that people have of
looking at the world in terms of
justifying their beliefs and in terms of
relying upon the authority of Science
and scientists and you look at those
things and and the finiteness of the
capacity of humans to change the world
or the finiteness of the resources that
we have or the fact that we aren't super
beings and super intelligences but those
super intelligence are coming all of
those other ways of looking at the world
you look at those as finite as an end in
some way it's very limiting as debasing
of people debasing of knowledge a
Poverty of opportunity as constraining
restrictive and coercive
but with David Deutsch's worldview you
have tools at your disposal not merely a
worldview but these tools that allow you
to combat bad thinking but at the same
time you never think of yourself or your
side the other people who agree with you
as any better or any less error prone
because you know as part of this
worldview that all of us are fallible
and flawed all the time but we can
improve we can always make progress
always often to any infinite future so
your mind expands to take into account
these infinite possibilities these
genuinely infinite possibilities
physically abstractly as a matter of
time off into the infinite future for
Humanity and civilization
you might expands to take on physical
reality as
far larger than anything that you ever
thought it could have been the scope and
scale of opportunity that you see before
you and before humanity is utterly
unrivaled in any other picture of the
universe now David Deutsch's extremely
modest about these things in the sense
that he thinks that his contribution is
footnotes to Papa and he says it again
in this interview now of course I
noticed myself when I read through the
work of poppy you can see Echoes of
popper in David Deutsch absolutely the
imprint is there but okay I can take
that on board but as a person who has
been doing this for a while and studying
both of them for quite some time I must
say that Papa doesn't really invoke the
cosmic significance of physics for
example in the same way that Deutsche
does and really lays it out explicitly
for you David presents a grand vision of
Science and in particular the physical
sciences but not only of course the
biological sciences as well as having
this deeply fundamental role in the
universe in able to shape being able to
shape the universe and through us and
that's not something you quite get from
Papa and David of course presents
something that I think that popper
really just it goes by Papa's philosophy
altogether and it's no fault of his papa
was making huge leaps and advances in
the philosophy of science and
epistemology broadly and the philosophy
of history and so on and so forth
political philosophy so this is no this
is this is no complaint about Papa what
I'm saying is that when David says he's
doing footnotes to pop-up I think it's
far grander than that in particular in
particular in what Naval and I have
focused on is this kind of optimism that
David Deutsch presents us with it is not
as some people have misconceived
recently I've noticed it is not optimism
in David Deutsch's sense is not about
thinking that everything's going to be
Rosy or that everything is Rosy or
should be looked at through rose-colored
glasses it has nothing to do with that
in fact it's almost the opposite of that
it says there's going to be problems
that sounds bad but the optimistic part
is they can always be solved by people
unless there is a law of physics
standing in the way and even when there
is a law of physics standing in the way
usually that problem that you think is a
problem is not in fact a problem the
laws of physics don't present us with
problems they just tell us what is
possible and impossible again another
part of David Deutsch's deep
philosophical understanding of the way
in which knowledge grows through his
most recent Advance the philosophical
and physical theory that is construct a
theory so if you're new to all this or
if you're not if you're an old fan
you've been watching since the beginning
I want to go back through some of the
archives so to speak and to point out
what topcast is about and what this
philosophical worldview entails because
topcast is kind of obtuse it is a
strange podcast at times it's not one of
these ones where people do interviews
with guests I've had one guest that's
David Deutsch himself and I'll probably
get him back at some point I might do
some more interviews in the future but
topcast is primarily well started out
primarily as an attempt by me to Simply
understand these books that David
Deutsch would put out because they stood
apart I was a geeky nerdy kind of kid
who used to like to read lots and lots
and lots and I really enjoyed all the
books that I could get my hands on
whether they were fantasy and science
fiction or popular science or rigorous
scientific texts and although I had read
the fabric of reality I read it before
podcasts were even a thing it wasn't
until the beginning of infinity that I
realized well look here's a book that is
so important merely telling people to
read it or buying it as a gift for
someone wasn't enough
this was something that had to be spread
to the masses it needed to be unpacked
properly even if only for myself which
is the way in which I first started the
podcast as I say reading through
passages in the book
and representing them in my own words
and it was that way that I felt that I
began to ground myself so to speak in
the content of the world view of the way
in which we approach absolutely
everything that a human can approach and
so there is some disagreement on that
that well does this contain everything
well it doesn't contain everything
except insofar as I think people should
approach the world and every interaction
they have whether it's other books and
other thinkers reading and writing the
business world the family World whatever
it happens to be in a spirit of reason
because reason is unbounded but what is
this thing reason what is this capacity
to understand and it doesn't matter
whether the understanding is explicit
you can write it down in words or
inexplicit where you can't
understanding could be you understand
how to ride a bike you understand how to
catch a all those things might not be
able to be easily captured in words but
they are part of Reason a reason
conception of the world and at the
moment the best encapsulation of reason
that I'm aware of and believe me I have
tried to search for others I'll talk
about some of those in this episode this
worldview presented in the beginning
Infinity in the fabric of reality is the
one that coheres and as far as possible
is able to explain many of the strands
of reality the way in which we would
approach an understanding of the world
so once I finished going through the
beginning of infinity I realized that
really what I was interested in doing
here was trying to generate more
knowledge about knowledge trying to
explain explanations and so of course
next on the list was the fabric of
reality but I found I was doing other
episodes as well on topcast so let me
give a rundown of what the episodes are
and perhaps even if you're a long time
listener something you may have missed
or some that might pique your interest
again now topcast is available on
YouTube where at least some of the
episodes are intended to be viewed as
videos however all of them are available
as audio on all podcast platforms
everything's free and everything's ad
free as well I've always done this as a
labor of love it's a community service
so to speak I think these ideas are very
important especially for this moment in
history we need more optimism we need
more appreciation for the central role
that people play in making the world a
better place and the fact that we don't
need to be down all the time
individually and as a civilization we
have so much to look forward to the
world continues to get better this
optimistic view of the world is a strong
theme that runs through every episode of
the podcast I would hope if you go to
YouTube you will see me there and if you
click on the tab that says videos then
you can scroll all the way back to the
very beginning of where topcast began or
you can go to any one of the podcast
platforms from Apple through to podbean
through Spotify and scroll all the way
back to episode one sometimes the
numbering is a bit different on Apple
podcasts and compared to other things if
you do go to YouTube and you do scroll
all the way to the very beginning of the
list of videos that I have you'll find a
bunch of resources there from back in
the days before I was doing podcasting
at all there is a version of topcast
which I have up there and I don't have
all the episodes there numbered top cast
episodes three four five at six and
seven and those are from a previous
iteration of top casts where I was
explaining things like the nature of
mathematics limitations of mathematics
and there there was a primitive version
of talkcast and the way in which I would
phrase things now might be subtly
different I might have completely
changed my mind however on some other
things like for example the episode
called the problem of induction which
goes for 43 minutes and 37 seconds I
won't have changed my mind there's some
stuff there from when I used to teach
physics for example so there's a long
video about the photoelectric effect
which is one of the seminal experiments
that can be conducted within the field
of quantum theory to show that light has
this Quantum property it comes in
discrete packets of energy and you can
the experiment that I do allows you to
calculate Planck's constant from
graphing some data my training my
masters my science degree was in
astronomy and astrophysics so I've got a
presentation there from when I taught
astrophysics and so there's some stuff
there about that and there's some stuff
on critical and creative thinking which
I still endorse to this day moving
through my videos there's a bunch of
stuff there that are short videos about
knowledge in general there's one there
about Free Will Consciousness creativity
and choice
something about subjective knowledge
which is something that popper actually
talked about Papa's main thing was
objective knowledge but he actually had
an essay about subjective knowledge and
I try to explain that as well what I'm
saying here is that not everything that
I produce is
the beginning of infinity and the fabric
of reality there is other supporting
materials so to speak emblematic of the
fact that not everything is to do
directly with the beginning of infinity
is there is a reaction video that I did
it's titled reason what is it and it's
comments on Dave Rubin and Jordan
Peterson in conversation with Greg
salmiri and euron Brooke salminary and
Brooke are philosophers and popularizers
of the philosophy of iron Rand and well
everyone knows who Jordan Peterson is
and and Dave Rubin is a journalist and
so they're talking about what reason is
and of course I think they get it
completely wrong
well if not completely wrong I think
they get they make some crucial errors
they're not popularium they don't
understand things about what conjectural
knowledge is for example they don't
understand things about fallibalism and
so I like to do commentaries on when
other intellectuals try and explain re
reason rationality because even if it's
objectivism even if it's iron Rand who
is a relatively recent philosopher they
make the same old mistakes if they don't
make contact with popper then they're
not presenting you with the most
up-to-date version of our understanding
of knowledge and reason and rationality
for that matter but really top cast
itself especially on the podcast
platform it begins with episode one of
course and episode one is an
introduction to the entire series
because I started putting out the audio
podcasts about 15 episodes in or so to
the YouTube channel so I'd created 15 or
so episodes of the series on the
beginning of infinity and then decided
Well let me take the audio from each of
these and turn it into a regular audio
podcast but before I do that let me
create an episode one which was an
introduction so on the audio platforms
you get this introduction which is also
available on YouTube as well just as
audio and so that episode one of topcast
is topcast and introduction episode 2 is
where I begin the discussion itself the
exposition of the beginning of infinity
chapter one The Reach of explanations
and these initial episodes are well well
I completely endorse the content of
everything that I say there I don't
think that I would change much in terms
of my language the central message is
exactly the same the only thing that I
would change if I was to re-record any
of this stuff would be perhaps the
confidence of the presentation I'm a
little bit halting I'm not very well
practiced in doing podcasting I've been
relatively well practiced in public
speaking no problem with that but I
didn't know how microphones worked I'm
still not
still not all that good with microphones
and audio equipment and that kind of
thing the technical side of things is
still my greatest downfall nevertheless
I'm better now I'm more confident now
and I kind of know how to engage a
little bit better with things like
podcasting having been interviewed
myself but back then I didn't know
exactly how to do that thing and also I
as I say I was making these early on
Purely for myself because I thought if I
can explain it out loud such that other
people watching would understand what I
say then that means that I and myself
understand it and so we begin with reach
of explanations and then we move through
chapter 2 chapter 3 chapter 4 and and on
YouTube it's very beginning of infinity
heavy where I just go through absolutely
all of the chapters sometimes a single
episode with a single chapter but then
other times for example we get to
chapter four and you'll see it is split
into two parts the name of chapter four
of the beginning Infinity is creation
there's part one and there's part two
because in the beginning of infinity
it's sort of divided in two parts
there's Creation in terms of how
biological knowledge comes into
existence via evolution by natural
selection and there's also well the
creation of the entire universe where
David talks about this issue of fine
tuning which is certainly a hobby horse
of mine one of my deep interests having
studied astrophysics and cosmology at
University this was one of my the most
fascinating areas of that subject for me
and so something that I talk about
throughout top cast at various points
around about that time of doing that
episode The Creation part 2 fine-tuning
David Deutsch and Sam Harris had their
second interview together what was then
called the waking up Podcast what is now
called The Making Sense podcast Sam
Harris interviewed David Deutsch twice
the second time they spoke they talked
about Sam's book the moral landscape and
what David thought about Sam's book the
moral landscape David's view on morale
which is kind of similar to his view on
reason broadly and what these
disciplines that we call for one of
another word disciplines science
mathematics morality philosophy how it
is that the methods within each although
subtly different cannot possibly operate
by completely different laws of
epistemology in other words you can also
create knowledge in the one way and
you're always fallible so this concept
of having a base Foundation that can't
be altered is misguided it's as
misguided in Morality as it is in
science and indeed mathematics David's
not a foundationalist now if that sort
of gets your hackles up and you think
well that sounds ridiculous well I would
urge you to listen to or watch that
particular episode where I break down
the breakdown in the conversation
between Sam and David well it wasn't a
breakdown it's just that Sam even
towards the end of the conversation
didn't understand where the disagreement
was
and many listeners to that also didn't
understand
what it was David was disagreeing with
and this is one of the great
difficulties sometimes with the world
view and so as I explained that video
the difficulty is in language precisely
because and Sam Harris appreciates this
he's a brilliant man he understood that
David was using words like knowledge
belief
Foundation
in a way that was different to Sam and
so although the words were the same the
languages were different because the
intended meaning of the words was
different
is David being unfair by revolutionizing
language no because he's not
what David is trying to do is to explain
what the words actually mean
and often he's cleaving to the common
sense man on the street understanding of
some of these words like knowledge for
example
do you know where your keys are yes I
know where my keys are they're in my
pocket now what that doesn't mean is I'm
absolutely certain and I have a
Justified true belief that my keys are
in my pocket you just know that's your
best guess yeah you've ruled out
everything else immediately you know
that they're not on the moon they're in
your pocket that's the last place you
remember having them are you Justified
can you have you felt your keys in your
pocket perhaps you haven't it's just
that you you know that that's where they
are you've got an explanation because
why would they be elsewhere this is what
David means when he talks about
something like no and knowledge but what
some professional philosophers or some
professional podcasters often don't
appreciate and even when he's having a
conversation with people it completely
goes over their head and so when there's
a disagreement about something like
what should your moral Foundation be
David says an explanation about how
there shouldn't be foundations in
knowledge and this includes morality and
you can only have questions about what
you should do next and that requires you
to create some knowledge and explanation
about what would be best to do next
having explained that people will still
come back at him and ask but
what is the moral foundation of the
theory you're using in order to choose
what to do next and so sometimes the
discussion can go in circles so that's
an episode and I think that remains I
think my most watched episode ever
certainly on YouTube anyway some of the
other episodes on the podcast audio
platform might be might have more
listens so to speak having spoken to
people about the beginning of infinity
many many times over the years one of
the chapters that comes up most for
questions
people ask me about is chapter five and
chapter five is titled the reality of
abstractions in that David lays out the
case of how not everything can be
explained in terms of physical forces
and particles that there are these
things we call abstractions that have
real physical effects in the world but
are themselves not physical and again if
that's blowing your mind or if that
makes you think ah spirituality ah
mysticism ah the supernatural no it has
nothing to do with any of those things
it's not to do with anything
Supernatural David spends a vast amount
of time using many examples even in his
interview with Naval and with Tim
Ferriss denying that this Supernatural
is ever a good explanation and
especially in the beginning of infinity
makes that point over and again so in
the reality of abstractions he is not
appealing to the supernatural he's
appealing to reason and saying that
things like mathematics are about
abstractions
but what are these abstractions how can
these mathematical things that are
abstract have effects in the physical
world that's why you should read the
reality of abstractions that's why you
should get the book first read that
chapter and then if you're struggling
watch my video where I try to explain
using other examples what we mean by the
reality of abstractions that's spread
over again two episodes chapter six is
the jump to universality a theme of
David Deutsch's work is about
universality about how some systems have
this quality we call universality
chapter six I want to explain more now
very fashionable at the moment very
timely I suppose is chapter seven all
about artificial creativity so it
includes discussions about AGI AGI
versus AI AGI would be an artificially
creative thing in other words artificial
in the sense that it didn't arise via
the means of evolution by natural
selection such as we did it would have
to be coded by us artificial creativity
chapter 8 is a mathematical chapter
about
infinity and about why is that your
intuitions might be challenged by the
reality of infinity and what Infinity
does and can do chapter nine is one of
my favorites it's simply titles optimism
and so it is kind of the Keystone
chapter really where David outlines what
I regard as one of his greatest
contributions to
Papa's philosophy additions to published
philosophy this is not a footnote this
is a Capstone if anything the
explanation of how people can change
reality fundamentally and as David said
in his interview with Naval and Tim
astrophysics off into the infinite
future will be a story of what choices
people make not merely about the effects
of gravity and the temperature of gases
and so I spend
three episodes discussing that chapter
the chapter on optimism chapter 10 is
called a dream of Socrates it's the one
that is most directly about the fine
details of epistemology written as
largely a dialogue between Socrates a
God Hermes and Plato topcast episode 22
which in the YouTube videos comes after
my discussion of chapter 10 a dream of
Socrates is one of these episodes that
comes up now and again where I move away
from the books altogether and I go to a
technical paper in this case it's a
technical paper that David has written
and it's an hour and three minutes of me
discussing something called the logic of
experimental tests and this is a heavy
paper but what I regard as the absolute
best and the Pinnacle of our
understanding of the philosophy of
science
this is David Deutsch at his best taking
the work of popper and taking it further
telling us about the role of the crucial
experiment now it's not to say that Papa
didn't get this at all but David is
applying it to everetti and quantum
theory among other things so the
Multiverse that explains how the
Multiverse is testable but also of
course explains in part the central role
that explanation plays and how in
science
what the purpose of an experiment is you
might think I know what the purpose of
experiment says but do you
you realize for example and again I go
to the interview with David Naval and
Tim you need to have more than one
Theory to test the theory there's no
point doing an experiment a crucial test
I should say
on a theory if there are no Alternatives
after all whatever the outcome of the
experiment is has to be even if it's
inconsistent with the theory cannot tell
you that the theory is false because if
it's inconsistent with the theory your
best explanation is there's something
wrong with your experiment there's
something wrong with your experiment
this is sometimes known as the juhum
Quinn thesis David goes through that and
I spent an hour and three minutes
talking about that personally I find the
paper absolutely fascinating and for
students of philosophy absolutely
essential reading next we get to one of
the Epic parts of topcast I suppose here
I spend five episodes discussing chapter
11. chapter 11 is the Multiverse the
Multiverse I think was explained in the
fabric of reality very very well in
chapter two called Shadows but in the
beginning of infinity David introduces
new Concepts this notion of fungibility
so I go through an introduction to
Quantum Theory I explain some of the
important experiments that are there in
quantum theory establishing the need for
us to invoke this thing called the
Multiverse which is not merely parallel
universes so get that out of your mind
that's one of the first misconceptions
that these things are just purely
parallel universes other alternate
realities which don't interact they do
but more importantly as Naval has
pointed out these are things are needed
in order to explain the functionality of
the quantum computer when it arrives so
five part series there's a playlist for
the Multiverse but it's also one of
those chapters I do admit where if
you're not into physics then you can
skip past it but I think that the entire
the entirety of the bigger infinity
should be read but okay fair enough if
you're not into physics then maybe you
can skip ahead maybe you can skip ahead
to chapter 12 which is one of the most
fun chapters in the book just because
it's about it's about some absolute
silliness that goes on in professional
Academia the title of chapter 12 is a
physicist's history of bad philosophy
and it really is a history of bad
philosophy and in particular
what the intellectual Community has done
to us over the last few decades the
poverty of ideas that appears there in
certain areas of professional philosophy
and you think you might think what do I
care about professional philosophy who
cares well philosophy is effectively
Upstream of the rest of Academia which
is Upstream of
politics and culture you better want to
take note of what the philosophers are
doing in University departments for
whatever reason they tend to direct the
way in which the other academics think
and the other academics tend to direct
the way in which well anyone who defers
to experts think so the media and
politicians business people they look to
the academics because hey they're the
experts but who do the experts look to
the philosophers why well it's a long
tradition of this
in some sense they should this is what
ancient Greek culture taught us this is
what some of the best civilizations that
existed prior to our Enlightenment
indeed the enlightenment ourselves
taught us we can do this again but we
have to have a criteria for what are the
good philosophies and what are the not
so good philosophies that's what chapter
12 is about chapter 12 is essential
reading and I would say anyone who picks
up the video Infinity that's one place
that you simply cannot miss is chapter
12. spend time reading it and rereading
it and understanding because even today
we have bad philosophies all that stuff
you hear about critical theory
critical genderqueer theory that stuff
post-modernism the stuff that animates
Jordan Peterson so often well there's
just one part of David Deutsch's entire
Focus but I find his razor sharp and
clearly targeted at where it should be
targeted the relativists yes but the
linguistic School of philosophy also and
I have a lot to say about that
throughout topcast and the various
episodes where I touch on philosophy
chapter 13 is about choices about
rational Choice Theory and that goes
over two parts about how it is that we
make decisions how does we make
decisions and whether or not we should
weigh our options based upon well the
preponderance of evidence for example
this is misconceived how could that be
misconceived well because people create
new options and so that's what choices
is about and then we get to one of the
most controversial chapters of all in
the beginning Infinity which is chapter
14 why are flowers beautiful where David
makes the case for objective Beauty he's
not denying their subject of beauty that
everyone has their own taste but he's
making the case for something more than
just that more than just well you can't
say what song is actually better Some
people prefer Britney Spears and some
people prefer Justin Bieber and there's
nothing you can say about which one is
actually better okay fine we all
understand that but is there an
objective Beauty out there in the world
worth striving for is there a way in
which to rank order aesthetic things
well a case is made in chapter 14 that
there are then on YouTube I have an
episode called top cast the borders of
ideas and this is a discussion about
some of the work of Douglas Murray where
I'm talking about some of his views that
broadly I support but here I'm talking
about
the focus on aspects of the immigration
debate at times whether we should keep
certain people out and my argument is
it's not about keeping certain people
out it's about keeping sometimes
ourselves protected from very bad ideas
it's an important distinction to make
and I make that case there recently I've
begun on topcast to make shorts as
they're called abbreviated versions of
some of my episodes but before this was
a thing on the YouTubes I was doing
introductions so there's an introduction
to popper and Deutsche that stretches
over four episodes there's an
introduction to the introductions and so
those are worth watching if you just
want a short snippet a short
introduction to these things so I've got
Deutsch digests and Deutsch discoveries
that's part two I've got popper primer
and then popper pieces that's part two
and so those are worth watching for
people that just want something much
shorter than my usual half an hour 45
minute or one hour episodes okay so
around there on YouTube anyway we have a
discussion also of chapter 15. this is
the evolution of culture uh that spreads
over three parts it's very important
because it contains David's exposition
of some absolutely new insights into
meme theory and David explains the
differences in culture between what are
known as static societies and dynamic
societies this is a an improvement upon
popper again I don't think a footnote I
think this is an important Improvement
on open and closed societies which is
what Papa talks about in terms of memes
anti-rational and rational means
anti-rational means the things that
prevent people from criticizing that
these ideas that prevent people from
actually being able to improve their
understanding of the world and improve
their situation and their circumstance
and so the this is a true Discovery by
David Deutsche true advance and what
Naval said was an advance Beyond
evolution by natural selection which I
think is quite right that David Deutsch
has made so again David Deutsch has made
contributions to epistemology to
computation to physics and to meme
theory that sort of straddles both
biological evolution and also
epistemology now if you're looking at
top cast the audio only podcast rather
than the YouTube version you'll find
that there are some slightly different
episodes peppered in amongst the top
cast feed for example within the
Multiverse series The Multiverse series
includes for example episode 24 of
talkcast is part two of the Multiverse
episode 25 is part three but then we get
to episode 26 and it's something
different altogether it's called
problems knowledge and wealth and then
episode 27 is Christian atheists and
these things are not to do with
centrally at the beginning of infinity
there's something slightly different and
then we get back into if you're on the
audio only version Episode 28 is back to
being the Multiverse and so this is what
I mean about sometimes we have these
unusual episodes that appear in the
audio feed and sometimes some of the
video ones for example those short
Snippets the introductions to popper and
Deutsch don't appear in the audio
version they're only on YouTube
returning to YouTube though once we've
dealt with chapter 15 The Evolution of
culture then David seamlessly moves into
a very closely related chapter which is
the evolution of creativity and so that
is about well creativity arising both in
biological evolution and in people as
well and what it was used for in people
for rather a long time I mentioned
anti-rational memes earlier and so that
brings in this concept of ways in which
ideas can actually misfire and cause us
as human beings as people who have the
creative ability to improve to sometimes
not improve because we've used our
creativity to actually hamper our
creativity it's creativity directed at
reducing creativity which is something
unfortunately that can happen and at its
very worst it can cause an entire
Society to cease being creative and
striving for improvements and this is
where we get this notion of stasis and
around about this time as I do the
evolution of creativity chapter 16
across three parts a part zero when I
say part zero there's a number of
episodes where I refer to the chapters
as part Zero part zero is where I do
absolutely no reading from the chapter
but rather it's an introduction to the
chapter it's um pre-reading if you like
often of other sources or it could be
just me laying the foundations of what I
might have learned at let's say
University about those things because
some of my background is in philosophy
and physics for example and so I might
be telling you what the mainstream ideas
are that are taught in Academia about
these things but in this series here of
the evolution of creativity you'll
notice on YouTube that there's a bunch
of episodes here where I've really gone
for something different and so for
example we have an episode just titled
Free Will exists an argument for the
busy it's 26 minutes of me defending the
thesis of Free Will borrowing heavily
from David Deutsch's copper atom
argument which will come up again later
there's also a fun episode there for
those who are interested in this
question of life elsewhere in the
universe and that's simply called are we
alone and I try and provide all the
background that I'm aware of from my
time studying actual astrobiology yes
it's a subject it's a subject without
subject matter as one of the lecturers
used to be fond of saying we haven't
discovered alien life yet we haven't
discovered life beyond the Earth at all
yet so having a subject astrobiology
seems a bit strange but it's about the
serious science of it is about the
constraints that can be placed upon how
evolution by natural selection might
work out there in the universe and how
biological organisms what they would
need minimally in order to thrive
somewhere beyond the Earth what are the
conditions that might be needed and then
beyond that
what are the conditions that would be
required for intelligent life to arise
somewhere else are those conditions
different what are the arguments for and
against I don't come down on a
particular side but I do try to provide
arguments that you may not have ever
heard elsewhere and people say things
like this is a hobby horse of mine that
the number of planets orbiting the
number of stars in the number of
galaxies out there in the cosmos is
astronomical astronomical this is where
the word astronomical really gains its
currency what I try to explain is that
there are numbers much larger than
astronomical ones biological ones the
argument there is in are we alone and I
draw heavily on the work of for example
a lecturer of mine Charlie line Weaver
and so I think that's a fun lesson after
that are two more unusual episodes one
is called cosmological economics the
argument for infinite growth one of
these contentious issues about this idea
of infinite optimism the idea that we
can have unbounded knowledge creation
therefore unbounded wealth creation and
therefore we can just continue to grow
the number of human beings not only on
the planet but throughout the cosmos and
gradually gain control of more and more
of it therefore economics is not bounded
by limited resources although that's
ostensibly what the subject is about of
course we do at any particular Moment In
Time have Fine Art resources and so this
is why we have this thing called
economics so that we can exchange goods
and services one with another in order
to distribute via the free market these
limited resources however this is the
argument where I try to marry out
deutsche's ideas of unbounded progress
and the infinite capacity of people to
create knowledge explanatory knowledge
gaining control over the universe
turning hitherto useless materials into
actual resources here's my attempt to
marry all of that up with the subject of
Economics after that a little interlude
of just 12 minutes worth of an
introduction to epistemology and the
theory of knowledge so well worth
listening to for anyone who's brand new
for example to epistemology in
particular to papyrian epistemology
which has nothing to do with Justified
true belief justify belief or belief at
all then we're back into creativity and
on the audio version we're up to now
episode 50 of topcast and then into
again one of the controversial chapters
of the beginning of Infinity of course
based upon reason based upon our best
understanding of science it brings us to
an appreciation of what human beings are
capable of and what this thing is the
environment and what those things are
resources and this is chapter 17
unsustainable by David Deutsch we hear
this word sustainable that government
policy should be sustainable that we
should have sustainable resources that
people should live sustainably but what
does this really mean David which has
his unique take on this where there are
two visions of what this word sustain
means on the one hand to keep things the
same to sustain them to keep them in
their present State and on the other to
ensure that something has enough in
order to thrive and in the case of
people what we need in order to thrive
in order to thrive is change we cannot
keep things the same we cannot sustain
things as they always have been we are
unsustainable the Earth cannot sustain
us the only way to survive the only way
to survive is to accept we must make
progress which means constant change
which means changing the universe around
us from useless materials into resources
and then constructed into protections
against a hostile environment in order
to make our lives better and if we care
about them the lives of other animals
and other entities as well because we're
the only one ones that are going to be
able to save everything else from future
catastrophes whether those be asteroids
from outer space viruses or the
Supernova going off or just eventually
the sun expanding something is going to
happen which will require much more
knowledge and wealth than we currently
have our circumstances not sustainable
so this is an argument against many of
the pessimistic bad philosophies that
drive modern environmentalism for
example although I've done a discussion
of the chapter on universality I have
produced in episode 53 of top cast and
it's there on YouTube as well an episode
called understanding universality trying
to unpack it a little bit further and to
clarify things Sam Harris is very
animated by this discussion of Free Will
and he insists that there is no free
will he's written a wonderful book which
is a defense of a position that I used
to hold myself that there was no free
will it was incompatible with
determinism I provide yet an another
episode about that and Free Will
response is a response to Sam Harris in
particular about that particular view
there's an episode that appears on
YouTube there called existence just
called existence and it is one of the
first in the theme of making music
videos if you like I put a soundtrack
underneath some of these videos I just
happen to like this I think that this
works some people can't stand it they
don't want me to put music under any of
my podcasts or videos whatsoever and so
a few of them they appear twice and
welcome to one of those in a moment but
existence is about what it means for
something to exist what it means for
something to be real under deutsche's
view of this as explained in particular
in the fabric of reality so I go through
that there we continue with
unsustainable we move on to something
about existential risk which also
animates me because I like to respond to
the prevailing pessimism is out there as
promoted by the intellectual luminaries
of our time people like uh Max tegmark
Nick Bostrom the Martin Reese
unfortunately as well people who are
narrowly focused on this concept of
existential risk but looking at it
through a lens of either we're going to
destroy ourselves or we're incapable of
saving ourselves and in either case we
need to be pessimistic about the future
because eventually the thing's going to
happen that's going to wipe us out there
is the existential risk of the
civilization level catastrophe that is
coming we stand on the other side of
that debate where although we recognize
there are such things as existential
risks we think people are the most
powerful entities in the universe
ultimately speaking and we can overcome
everything from viruses and natural
disasters here on Earth to being
swallowed by black holes or being
destroyed by Supernova what it is what
is required is creating the knowledge of
how to figure out how to do these things
we've already figured out how to prevent
ourselves dying from the cold
by creating houses that have heating
often heating provided by fossil fuels
so we've done that we've invented
clothes
this will only continue this open-ended
ability to create a stream of solutions
to the ever increasing stream of
problems that we encounter as long as we
continue to solve them at a rate faster
than they're likely to kill us then we
can survive and we will survive if we
maintain optimism the understanding
there's a possibility that whatever the
problem is it can be solved with some
effort the final chapter of the being
Infinity is called the beginning
it's called the beginning and so I won't
say any more about that now but that
brings us up to the end of almost the
end of my discussion of the beginning of
infinity then there is
one of my favorite episodes and if I can
be so immodest is to say I think one of
naval's favorite episodes as well of
topcast called the Nexus which is about
persons in the Multiverse I am really
focused on trying to understand what
this thing a person is
once we have an understanding of a
person then we can have a discussion
about what genuinely agir I don't know
what an AGI is I think it I'm thinking
more and more it has to be beyond the
mere purview of our present
understanding of epistemology it has to
be beyond our conception even of
programming
by which I mean I think there's
something to be said for as I title the
episode understanding what a person in
the Multiverse is what does that mean
there are fungible instances of
ourselves
everywhere at every moment coexisting
with us that differentiate from us what
does that even mean well I try and
grapple with this in an hour-long
episode called persons in the Multiverse
and that is again a soundtrack
accompanied episode I like the music I
think it adds something to the mood but
if you can't stand it this is one of
those ones where I've produced it in two
forms there is a no music version for
those of you who can't stand my choice
of music of course there's issues with
copyright so I can only pick stuff that
I've paid for I have to actually pay for
a license to use some of this music
after the beginning of infinity I've
then commenced discussing Chiara
mylettos the science of Canon can't this
is a wonderful introduction to David
Deutsch's Constructor Theory Kiara
maletto is the chief researcher aside
from David Deutsch on Constructor Theory
she's written the first popular science
book and it's very accessible about
Constructor Theory and it goes through
everything from what the theory is about
through to our deepest understanding of
what knowledge is at the moment as well
so I'll come to that later I've done an
episode on quasars again returning to my
roots as someone trained in astrophysics
but also connecting the astrophysics to
David Deutsch's epistemology and
philosophy and physics
because he often invokes quasars as an
example of something that is just so
different from the physics of the human
mind and yet it's the physics of the
human mind that understands what is
happening in that system that we call a
quasar and so connecting these two
extremely different systems is a
wonderfully deep fact about our universe
that this thing can happen that one
thing the mind can come to resemble the
other a quasar alongside the science of
canonkano also began my breakdowns of
the fabric of reality fabric reality
David Deutsch's first book the first
chapter of which is called The Theory of
Everything so that begins also on
topcast I then make some remarks about
crypto I'm certainly not a Bitcoin
expert but I was absolutely fascinated
as I dove into this and Naval rather
gave me a good schooling in this you
know listening to his discussions with
Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan and and very
other places where he has discussed this
at length I became fascinated more by
ethereum than by Bitcoin because of the
universality of ethereum and so I
remarked I made some remarks about
crypto there which might be insightful
for some just because I'm coming at it
from a computational universality
perspective rather than anything else
but there are marks there for anyone
who's interested in crypto that that
might that might be of interest to some
people once I've completed the beginning
of infinity altogether I then
interviewed David Deutsch of course I
did I had to talk to the man himself
about the beginning of infinity and so I
have questioned him about the book and I
split up the questions and made separate
episodes with introductions by myself to
each question that I asked him and then
provided my question and then his answer
as well so including there's one there
um David Deutsch comments on the recent
UFO sightings the uaps the unidentified
aerial phenomenon stuff so worth
listening to David Deutsch about that
but also asked him a question about
truth this was something that Jordan
Peterson and Sam Harris were at
loggerheads about so get David
deutsche's view on that the Scientific
American
just like nature the journal now and
again produces
absolute rubbish when it comes to
certain articles editorials whatever
under the guise that it comes with the
authority of science often it doesn't so
in this episode it's not scientific and
it's not American I explain what I think
is wrong with a certain Scientific
American article and let's just say the
whole culture that sometimes Academia
has with respect to resources and the
role of humanity in the universe I was
interviewed by Christopher the host of
do explain another podcast which has
featured David Deutsch and various
others within the community of people
who promote his ideas and so I was
interviewed there in two parts so that's
up there on my website we then move on
to more about the fabric of reality
there's my discussion of chapter two
Shadows chapter 2 Shadows is where I
always Point people to chapter two of
the fabric of reality is where I point
people to if they really want to be
persuaded of the Multiverse David
Deutsch lays out a simple experiment
there that is a real experiment that can
can be done that is done that is done
often as a demonstration and this
experiment can only be understood in
terms of the Multiverse view of quantum
theory I then do an ironic defense of
socialism a critique if you like as well
some more science of Cannon Khan
including the science of information so
we've got information Theory spread over
two parts the second of my interviews
with Christopher and do explain and so
both of those together provide you with
a a background in certainly my
perspective on things as informed by
David Deutsch and Carl Poppa and then we
get to something quite academic indeed
which is a paper by Carl Poppa called
the aim of science the aim of science as
a professional philosophical paper that
he wrote and my breakdown of that over
an hour and 13 minutes so if you're a
real philosophy buff and you really want
to get down into the nitty-gritty of
what a science genuinely is and this is
the paper for you and of course I update
it with what Deutsche has said in light
of his discoveries especially in terms
of the logic of experimental tests which
I think is that as I say the Pinnacle of
our understanding of the philosophy of
science I've written over my years being
involved in education on things like
critical and creative thinking I have my
perspective on that I think Carl popper
explained what critical and creative
thinking are but now it's just a
fashionable term that's used in academic
circles and I think they often get it
quite wrong so my view of critical and
creative thinking is there in critical
and creative thinking 2.0 okay so it's
the updated version of my most recent
thoughts on this caramelitos Quantum
information chapter four from the
science of Canon card fallibalism a
video that I think is so important for
people new to the work of David Deutsch
to understand what is this thing
fallibalism fallibleism is not
relativism and it's not dogmatism it's
the one thing that rejects both and is
able to reject both and allows us to
continue to have the possibility of can
continual progress by accepting that all
of our theories can contain error but we
are the error correctors we are the
knowledge creators because we are
fallible we cannot have the final answer
and that's a good thing that means that
progress is always possible David has
said that you know kind of popper might
have only had one idea from which you
derived everything else and this is the
way in which the whole world view of
David Deutsch kind of works but in terms
of Papa's philosophy popper had the idea
that people encounter problems and then
they want to solve them
so this is the problem-centered approach
of all of reason all of philosophy all
of science all of mathematics is about
having a problem and so the fabric of
reality chapter three is called problem
solving and it's very much an
exploration of that and so this is my
exploration of that chapter in two parts
more questions from David and eventually
I get to something called wealth and the
conflict of ideas and wealth in the
conflict of ideas is me discussing
misconceptions about capitalism in the
free market which I regard as synonymous
and other people reject that notion that
they are synonymous I think that they
are I follow well a number of people in
this but in particular euron Brooke who
I think is a wonderful Expositor and
defender of capitalism and you can marry
this up with on the one hand my praise
of him there with my critique of him in
this one which is computational
universality where euron Brooke has a go
at Sam Harris for his views on the mind
and the idea that people's minds are or
people's brains are meat computers which
is something that Sam Harris says which
is correct because of computational
universality you have to understand that
euron Brook doesn't unfortunately
understand that he doesn't understand
the physics and the universality of
computation saying something is a
computer like a mind is not denigrating
it it's not denigrating it any more than
saying it's made out of matter any more
than saying that the brain contains 75
water that doesn't denigrate it it's
just a it's just a fact that the brain
is Computing stuff
now it's doing something very different
to every other computer but that doesn't
mean it's not a computer it's got a
special kind of software which you call
the mind on it anyway so if you want to
see my discussion of what euron thinks
of Sam and what Sam's view of the mind
is and where it might be flawed this is
my explanation of that in light of what
David Deutsche said about computational
universality explanatory universality
and the possibility of creating
knowledge which is what people do here I
begin also my discussion of Stephen
pinker's rationality chapters one and
two Stephen Pinker is a world-renowned
intellectual and author who presents in
his book rationality one of his more
recent books the
pristine version of what academics and
your typical intellectual thinks about
this term rationality and how to think
correctly and properly in an erudite way
so that you make fewer errors and that
kind of thing well here's my view about
all of that let's just say that although
of course in order for a person to have
such success as Stephen Pinker Sam
Harris of that matter anyone in Academia
they have to know something about reason
they have to understand knowledge
there can still be errors they do make
errors they don't understand popper
indeed Stephen Pinker basically just
ignores the existence of popper and
Deutsch for that matter although he he
was a great proponent of the work of
David Deutsch he was a he has praised
the big work the the beginning of
infinity before but
to be honest when he writes about these
topics in rationality it's as if he
never read the book I'm sure he did but
one of two things might have happened
one he may have forgotten everything
that he read there or two he read into
the book something
that he expected to read he expected to
see stuff about Justified true belief
and so on and so forth and he didn't
understand conjectural knowledge and so
he didn't understand it this is why I do
the podcast you see the reason that
topcast exists is for people like
Stephen Pinker very intelligent people
and my audience who perhaps don't have
time like me or the interest to read the
book
I don't know how many times now dozens
of times I've listened to the audiobook
dozens of times it took me a long time
to really grapple with what was being
said and so
not only did I have to produce a podcast
if I think understand it better but the
podcast now serves as don't make the
same mistakes as everyone else who reads
it only once and doesn't quite get it
take the lead from someone like Navarre
or ever can who has says he's carrying
around these two books to be Infinity in
the fabric of reality uh because they
kind of serve as critiques of every
other book out there like rationality
for example so you don't need to read
those other books I do because I'm just
interested in finding out where the
errors are what these people are
thinking
but these two other books these the
beginning infinity and the fabric of
reality allow you to just spot errors
everywhere else and to have an excellent
understanding of our deepest knowledge
and so therefore you can see the areas
that people are making and you can see
the opportunities for progress and the
opportunities for moving forward where
others don't okay and so more about the
science of Canon cart my favorite
chapter from the science of Cannon Khan
is there about knowledge and Chiara
describing knowledge as resilient
information information that remains in
place over time and actually
can become the most resilient structure
in the universe eventually there will be
the thing that persists over time
because it's useful because we will
preserve it we get to my retrospective
episode 99 of top cast and there on
YouTube it is 1 hour 39 minutes and one
second so 99 minutes exactly it's hard
to edit that let's get it just right but
it's my retrospective we're actually go
through every single chapter and provide
a summary of just the beginning infinity
and that's followed by episode 100 the
celebration episode where my the the
interview with David Deutsch in its
entirety is there so previously I just
had separate episodes with an
introduction by me to each of the
questions but this contains more content
a substantial amount more content than
just the other ones as well episode 101
was my first AMA first ask me anything
just what you get after that was
something I called the thin veneer again
another one of these music videos where
Joe Rogan is in conversation with Blair
white and Joe Rogan says some I find Joe
just such a wonderfully curious fellow
highly intelligent but his mind is open
to possibilities you know without fully
endorsing craziness okay so sometimes he
goes a bit far with the alien thing but
so what I think this is good he's not
saying that he you I've listened to
enough episodes of Joe Rogan to know
that he's an Entertainer and just a
curious guy he's not a full-on
conspiracy theorist anyway so what I'm
responding to here is something he says
which I just find because he's a
spiritual kind of a guy but it syncs up
with what I regard as a realistic
conception of the world informed by some
of the content in David Deutsch's book
David Deutsch's work allows for mystery
and a sense of awe at the cosmos it's
not a narrow denuded on of inspiration
view of science it is quite the opposite
it is Grand wondrous Vision about what
people are and what the cosmos in our
place within it amount to and then to
another AMA then the highly provocative
episode that I'm often tweeting out on
on Twitter which is are we running out
of resources my answer is no and I
explain why more fabric of reality stuff
I try to succinctly explain what is a
good explanation succinctly in 20
minutes I then began a newsletter and so
you can find my newsletter on substack
it contains different content to what is
on topcast that's very intermittent it's
just they'll stuff that takes my
interest that might not fit within the
regular topcast feed but the first
episode the name of the newsletter is
the three r's reality reason and
rationality and so an introduction to
that is actually in the topcast feed
more about rationality than some more
newsletter stuff one of my favorite
episodes that I've produced that I'm I
guess I'm proud of is objective
knowledge here has an audio only version
but it's there on YouTube as well but
you don't get to see my head and it just
listen to my voice and this is my
understanding of the state of play of
what objective knowledge is in 2022 2023
2024 this is where I think the state of
play is now with objective objective
knowledge was a book written by popper
to explain his vision of knowledge and
how it is created and how it is checked
against reality and so forth David
Deutsch updated this and so this is my
synthesis of these two great minds and
what I think we can say objective
knowledge is so I've called it an
explanation for the 21st century more
newsletters then we get to work and heat
where I do a little a little
demonstration about heat pumps and and
engines heat engines this is again about
thermodynamics from the science of
Cannon cart more newsletters something
about energy another ask me anything
then after some fabric of reality we get
to Origins again there's a music version
there's a non-music version this is
about the first images that were
released by jwst the James Webb Space
Telescope very exciting for anyone who's
ever had any interest in astrophysics
whatsoever is the new Space Telescope
that's up there so this is my scientific
explanations of what these images are
these first images that came out I love
doing reaction videos and in fact
everyone loves me doing in reaction
videos they are among my most popular
videos is when I tackle other podcasters
in particular when I tackle what Sam
Harris might have said I don't like to
pause scoring on Sam Harris I have great
respect for Sam Harris he is one of of
course the most important voices of our
time but I do think he makes errors and
I do think that he can tend in the
direction of pessimism and I think it
needs to be answered his audience is
obviously far greater than mine he has
far greater reach and this needs to be
answered and so when he produces
episodes like the end of Global Order
which was just about how the world's
going to end so many of his episodes are
about how the world's gonna end it's
very pessimistic I feel I need to say
something and people seem to enjoy it
I've got another one of those coming out
soon after this in fact it might be the
episode after this where I'm going to do
a breakdown of yet another discussion
that Sam Harris has with someone so the
end of global order if you want to hear
me talking about and responding to the
content of a making sense podcast with
Sam Harris more from Stephen Pinker it's
basically a critique at this point once
I'm as I'm slowly making my way through
rationality I'm up to now chapter five
and six where I think pink is just
getting the wrong end of the stick on uh
what what it means to be rational he
thinks that we need to believe something
based upon the weight of the evidence
and I think something quite different
following what David Deutsch says in the
beginning of infinity I then have more
analysis of another paper by Carl popper
some more newsletter stuff and then I
produced a very long series about again
this is another analysis of a Sam Harris
conversation this time with Max tegmark
where I've called it things that make
you go hmm and because every episode
that I produced it seemed to be about
something beginning with m so we've got
metaphysics and misconceptions we've got
mathematics and multiversals we've got
Minds one and two and so you can have a
look at at this entire series of
podcasts here I found it a lot of fun
it's clips of Sam and Max talking about
stuff and you know Max likes to talk
about different versions of the
Multiverse and you know I sort of take
him to task over the extent to which
some are scientific and some aren't his
view of mathematics which is informed by
his view of physics which I think is
mistaken his view of computation he is
understanding of what metaphysics is and
the role of knowledge and our capacity
to create explanatory knowledge and all
this sort of stuff and of course of
course Sam and Max are on the same page
largely when it comes to this question
of super intelligence and AGI and I
think they are terribly misconceived
terribly mistaken about this in a
dangerous way quite seriously then I
begin to produce shorts these short
videos here
um which are yeah Snippets if you want I
suppose if you're getting bored of me
talking for hours at a time here's
something much shorter and more brief
finally I have completed the series on a
science of Canon Cup by Kiara maleta I'm
yet to interview Chiara but at some
point I will have a discussion with her
I then move on to discussing objectives
to epistemology because it's the one
that people bring up most often on
social media whenever they try and
engage me in discussions about the work
of David deutschen in particular the
epistemology of Carl popper and David
Deutsch they say but hold on Ein Rand
has already explained objective
knowledge objectivist epistemology and I
think there are no real advances or
insights in the epistemology of anaran
that go beyond what other people who
came before her said
she attempts to use induction and the
way she explains things is the way that
many other philosophers have explained
things before but I go to her sources
and quote her and then explain why I
think she and her followers in
objectivism get epistemology wrong I
think they get a lot of other stuff
right in fact I think they do a
reasonable job in the area of morality
improving things there and they do a
reasonable job in in talking about
realism but they get epistemology wrong
and so respectfully I I go through
quoting not only Iran but also other
people who claim expertise in
objectivism other philosophers of
objectivism at some point David Deutsch
won a prestigious prize called the
Breakthrough prize for his contributions
to Quantum information and Quantum
computation and so there's an episode
there called breakthrough Prize or who
is David Deutsch so if you want to
introduce David Deutsch there we go 19
minutes worth of an introduction to
David Deutsch it's an episode called
Carl popper verse the rest and then I
get into a lengthy discussion about this
paper that appears in the book
conjectures and refutations right at the
beginning there but it appears elsewhere
as well called on the sources of
knowledge and of ignorance by Carl Poppa
and so I explain knowledge and ignorance
because I think it is the preeminent
contribution that Papa made to
epistemology in a succinct way but again
it's written at a time and in a style
where English was subtly different and
so although mere decades have passed
it's a long enough time and especially
because he's writing in a style of
professional philosophy even though I
find him far clearer than most other
philosophers that sometimes it could be
difficult to unpack and it's important
to unpack these things I think for the
layperson to understand still making my
way through the fabric of reality and so
we're up to the significance of Life
still making my way through pinker's
rationality and so up to chapter 7 there
as well knowledge and ignorance goes on
for uh you know five episodes so that
continues another effectively and ask me
anything kind of episode but I I talk
about tweets on Twitter that that have
caught my eye over recent times a really
important episode that I find is one
that I produce called degrowth where I
unpack an article in nature this article
in nature is somewhere it sits somewhere
between just complete opinion editorial
and peer-reviewed Journal paper it's
hard to tell the way that nature the
journal passes it off it would seem as
if it's a peer-reviewed piece of
research
but it's a political Treatise and so I
take issue with that especially with
this dangerous philosophy of d-growth
an hour and a half I explain what D
growth is then I explain my criticisms
of it and I have a laugh along the way
so
um if you're interested in D growth the
plan for civilizational Decline and
disaster have a look at that one it's
got quite a few views as far as my
videos go Small Time Channel but you
know as of today's date you know 24th of
March 2023 1 300 views three months ago
so that one I quite enjoyed making and I
think people have enjoyed watching it I
always say I can't take credit for the
ideas that I espouse here I take
responsibility for the errors that I
make but I'm not often presenting
anything unique here I'm not a
professional philosopher I'm not a
professional physicist if anything I'm a
communicator a conduit of ideas I
repackage things but here in this
episode Consciousness and creativity a
relatively recent one 17 minutes and 30
seconds worth
it's got 2 300 views that's pretty good
for me and this one I take a bit of a
leap I'm conjecturing things myself
about the nature of Consciousness and
about the nature of creativity and
whether these things are the same thing
or not so although I am certainly
riffing on what David Deutsch has said
in the beginning of infinity I am
substantively going a little further so
I'm not saying that this is what David
Deutsch said you know in fact in none of
my episodes should I say that except
where I'm quoting him I'm very careful
to quote him but in this one in
particular this is all me
well largely money anyway listen to that
for my views on Consciousness if you
happen to be interested in that kind of
a thing another professional
philosophical paper is discussed this
one about the nature of philosophy
itself and the debate between
Wittgenstein who thought that all the
philosophy reduced to language puzzles
this is the linguistic school and papa
who thought they were genuine
philosophical problems
philosophy actually solves stuff that is
important for people to Survive and
Thrive and for science to continue to do
its work so this is the great debate and
so this is my discussion of that
particular debate knowledge and
ignorance goes on to part six where I
reach the conclusion and then a you know
another talking Twitter another AMA
style thing and then a really fun
episode uh knowledge for the next
millennium a message for the next
millennium 28 minutes and 37 seconds of
me warning people about the end times
so uh that one's more light-hearted but
with obviously a deep message from the
theme that runs through you know all of
topcasts here population three stars
this is the first of my episodes in
science news from a critical rationalist
perspective so to speak I'm going to be
doing these regularly as regularly as I
can to fit in between all the other
stuff that I do as you can see topcast
is rather strange as I said so I'm I'm
beginning to do news because I know that
other science popularizers are out there
doing science news and the way in which
they present it it's either like they're
presenting it as religion or as an
authority something like that I want to
withhold judgment on these things and to
say where it is we know something and
where it is we don't know something
we're up to quantum computers as of the
day I'm making this
when it comes to the fabric of Reality
Part Two there will have to be a part
three then a discussion of an academic
paper by David Deutsch David Deutsch
wrote a paper called it from Cubit this
was in response to a paper by his mentor
one of his mentors one of the people who
inspired him John Wheeler the great
physicist who wrote a paper in which a
thesis was presented called it from from
bit it from bit and John Wheeler's
hypothesis conjecture there was the at
base everything was information and not
physical and I discussed David Deutsch's
response to that thesis and then I'm up
to today and so this is now where we're
up to today an experimental test of the
quantum Multiverse which was taken from
my Multiverse series for anyone who was
watching anyone who's listening to the
Tim Ferriss interview who might have
wanted more information about that so
this is what topcast is as of now and
topcast will continue on discussing in
the work of David Deutsch we have more
to discuss from the fabric of reality I
want to get through rationality by
Stephen Pinker tidy things up there
explain why those mainstream views are
wrong continue to have interaction with
people via ask me anything episodes as
well but that'll do for today as always
if you would like to support me
www.breathhold.org here's the webpage
and there are links there to patreon and
PayPal but until next time bye
oh
[Music]
up up